There are four steps to implementing
a model in JAGS through R.
The first step is to specify the model.
The next step is to set up the model.
The third step is to run
the MCMC sampler.A nd finally
the fourth step is post processing.
We'll demonstrate all four of these here.
Let's do this using our running example.
Where we have data representing
the percentage change in
total personnel from last year
to this year in ten companies.
In this model, we used a normal
likelihood with a known fixed variance.
And a t distribution for
the prior on the unknown mean.
The first step is to specify the model.
If we haven't done it already,
we first need to load the rjags package.
This requires that rjags has
previously been installed,
which you can do with this
line of code up here.
Once the library is loaded, we specify
the hierarchical structure of the model.
Let's remind ourselves what
this model looks like.
We have a normal likelihood for the data,
which are independent,
with mean mu and variance 1.
Our prior on the mean is a t
distribution with location 0,
scale 1, and degrees of freedom 1.
We can write out the hierarchical
form of the model into jags
through a variable that we're
going to call mod_string.
This will be a model where we use curly
braces to encapsulate the model itself.
And for the likelihood portion we're
going to use a for loop, for in 1:n.
Suppose n is the length of our data,
inside this loop we'll say y[i].
The i observation follows
a normal distribution.
The syntax for that in JAGS is dnorm,
just like it is in R.
With mean mu and
precision 1 divided by the variance.
This is how the normal distribution
differs between JAGS and R.
In JAGS this is the precision which
is the reciprocal of the variance.
That completes the likelihood.
So now let's put in the prior for mu.
Mu is going to follow a t distribution.
The density for that in JAGS is dt.
And just to be careful,
let's check the user manual
to see how the T distribution
is parametrized in JAGS.
The first argument it accepts is mu,
which is the location parameter.
The second parameter it accepts is tau.
Here, if you were going to look
at the T distribution in R,
you would notice this
parameter is down here near k.
That would be the scale parameter.
This is 1 over the scale parameter or
the inverse scale parameter.
Finally, k refers to the degrees
of freedom in the t distribution.
So the three parameters we need
are location 0, inverse scale 1,
and degrees of freedom, 1.
The degrees of freedom is an integer so
I'll leave it as an integer.
Remember that the only parameter we didn't
know that we're trying to estimate is mu.
We are assuming we know sigma squared and
that it's fixed.
So let's tell JAGS
the value of sigma squared.
This completes our
specification of the model.
JAGS requires that we write models
as strings as we've indicated here.
So we need to put this model
inside the quotation marks.
This is what a model looks like in JAGS.
The second step is to set up the model.
First, we'll enter the data.
And we'll save n as the length of y.
Before JAGS can run this model,
we need to tell it what the data are,
what the parameters are.
And provide initial values for
those parameters.
The data that we'll pass to JAGS,
we'll call a variable data_jags.
It needs to be a list where we
name the variables the same
name that we give them in
the model specification.
So y is our data y.
And n is the n we just saved here.
We also need to tell JAGS
what the parameters are.
We'll save that in
a variable called params.
Our only parameter in this case is mu.
But if we wanted to add other
parameters like the variance,
it could be placed in a vector like this.
But we're only using mu.
To give JAGS initial values,
we need to write a function.
Let's call that function inits.
The function doesn't take any arguments.
But it creates a variable called inits and
places that into a list
where we create a value for
each parameter in the model.
Our only parameter is mu,
we put it quotation marks and
we provide an initial value.
Let's just use 0 as we did before.
There are actually multiple ways
to specify initial values in JAGS.
They can be explicitly set
at values you tell it,
like we've done here, or
they could be random.
We could replace this number
here with a function call
to generate a random initial value for mu.
Finally, we're going to
compile the model itself.
Using the jags.model function
from the rjags package.
The first argument for
jags.model is that model string.
This is usually placed
in a separate text file.
But because we're going to enter
that directly into the R console.
Instead, we're going to
create a text connection and
give it our model string.
The second argument is the data
which we've called data_jags.
And next it'll take the initial values.
Before we run this let's set
the random number generator seed
so that we can reproduce our results.
Let's use 50 there.
We haven't entered anything
into the R console yet.
So let's go ahead and do that.
First the model string.
Then we'll set the seed and
we'll enter all the model setup pieces.
Finally, let's assign the model.
Running jags.model will
initialize the model which can
sometimes take a few moments.
We're now ready to take our next step
which is to run the MCMC sampler.
There are two very important functions for
this step.
The first function is the update function.
Where we give it the model and we tell it
how many iterations we want it to update.
Let's say 500.
This function when we run it
runs the MCMC sampler for
500 iterations without
saving the samples anywhere.
This gives the Markov chain some time
to find the stationary distribution.
The next function is
the coda.samples function.
This is where we we'll simulate a Markov
chain and keep our simulations.
Coda.samples function where
we give it the model,
which is the mod that we
initialized right here.
We need to tell it the variable names
Which in our case we named params.
It was this variable up here.
We need to tell it how many
MCMC iterations to run.
Let's do 1000.
We will not provide initial values for
this run because this chain has already
been running for 500 iterations.
This will simply continue where
the chain left off when we last ran it.
Let's run this sampler for
the thousand iterations.
The fourth and
final step is post-processing.
We won't get into many details here, but
we will do lots of post-processing
later in the course.
This is where we evaluate
the Markov chains we've simulated
to determine if they're suitable for
inference.
And then we can use them for inference.
The Coda package will be
especially useful to us here.
Let's load the Coda package, and let's
first look at a trace plot from our model.
Let's run the plot there.
And it gives us both a trace plot and
a density estimate for mew.
So this is our posterior distribution for
mu.
Similar to the one we obtained earlier,
using our random lock
Metropolis-Hastings sampler.
We can also look at
a summary from our model.
The summary tells us which iterations
of the chain we're using and
gives us some other statistics
related to our Markov chain.
It also gives us some information about
the parameters we've been estimating,
that we've been simulating with the chain.
For example our estimated
posterior mean for
mu is 0.91 with a standard
deviation of 0.31.
We will discuss post
processing further including
convergence diagnostics
in a coming lesson.